
>>An American Story

In 1801, Washington DC was slowly 
rising from a swampy site on the 
Potomac River (puh •TOH •mihk). 
The nation’s new capital had only 
two prominent buildings—the president’s 
mansion (later called the White House) 
and the still-unfinished Capitol. 
Between them stretched about two 
miles of muddy streets on which 
pigs and chickens roamed freely. 
Very few people liked being in 
Washington. It was hot and humid 
in the summer, and the river and 
swamps were a breeding ground for 
mosquitoes. Abigail Adams, the 
wife of John Adams, called the 
new capital “the very dirtiest Hole.”

>>The Election of 1800

In 1800 Federalists supported President Adams for a second term and Charles Pinckney of South Carolina for vice president. Republicans nominated Thomas Jefferson for president and Aaron Burr of New York for vice president. The election campaign of 1800 differed greatly from campaigns of today. Neither Adams nor Jefferson traveled around the country making speeches. Instead the candidates and their followers wrote letters to leading citizens and newspapers to publicize their views.

The letterwriting campaign, however, was not polite. 
Federalists charged the Republican Jefferson, who 
believed in freedom of religion, with being “godless”. 
Republicans warned that the Federalists would bring 
back monarchy. Federalists, they claimed, only 
represented the interests of wealthy people 
with property. 

>>Election Deadlock 

When members of the Electoral College voted, 
Jefferson and Burr each received 73 votes. 
Because of this tie, the House of 
Representatives had to decide the 
election. At the time, the electors 
voted for each presidential and vice-presidential 
candidate individually rather 
than voting for a party’s 
candidates as a team. 

In the House, Federalists saw a chance to prevent 
the election of Jefferson by supporting 
Burr. For 35 ballots, the election remained 
tied. Finally, at Alexander Hamilton’s urging, 
one Federalist decided not to vote for Burr. 
Jefferson became president, and Burr 
became vice president. 

To prevent another tie between a presidential and a vice-presidential candidate, Congress passed the Twelfth Amendment to the Constitution in 1803. This amendment, ratified in 1804, requires electors to vote for the president and vice president on separate ballots. 

>>Jefferson’s Inauguration 

On March 4, 1801, the day of the presidential inauguration, Jefferson dressed in everyday clothes. He left his boardinghouse and walked to the Senate to be sworn in as president. President Adams had slipped out of the presidential mansion and left the city so he would not have to watch Jefferson become president. 

In his Inaugural Address, Jefferson tried to reach out to Federalists: “We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists,” he said. Then he outlined some of his goals, which included maintaining  “a wise and frugal [economical] government” and “the support of state governments in all their rights. ” He believed that a large federal government threatened liberty and that the states could best protect freedom. 

Jefferson believed in reducing the power and size of the federal government. These ideas were similar to the French philosophy of laissez-faire (LEH • ZAY FEHR), which means “let (people) do (as they choose).”